---
layout: post
title:  "Compiling GF to a low-level format"
date:   2018-06-13
categories: gf
tags: gf
---

So I'm talking a bunch about PGF, PMCFG, concrete categories, sequences and
such when I talk about `gftest`. If you ever wondered what's that all
about, keep reading.

How about if you have never wondered what's that all about? Honestly,
that's no problem either. It may be cool to learn about PMCFG if you're
writing a lot of GF, but only in the sense that it may be cool to
learn some Italian if you [eat a lot of pizza](https://twitter.com/matthewconover/status/1004130435650150400).
So take this post as a cool extra tidbits about your favourite grammar
formalism, not as a prerequisite for anything.

*Update 2018-12-28: this post adapted into   a [presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1yWUCS95DuVmKLTHMnCeVSJ8qXiilTcli5elZCrtaKEs/edit?usp=sharing).*

## Terminology

**PMCFG** is short for "Parallel Multiple Context-Free Grammar", introduced by [Seki et al. (1991)](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/81109478.pdf). (An important subset of) GF is "equivalent to" PMCFGs, in the sense that all things we can express in GF, we can also express in PMCFG. As the name might suggest, PMCFGs are more expressive than plain old context-free grammars, but still not quite as expressive as context-sensitive grammars.

Okay, and what are the formats for writing PMCFG grammars? That is, "grammars that are as expressive as those by Seki et al., and that have the same hard-to-read low-level feeling to them".

We know of at least three:
1. The particular format used by [Seki et al.](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/81109478.pdf)
1. [This format](https://github.com/PMCFG/PMCFG/blob/master/specification.md) which doesn't seem to have gained much following
1. PGF, by [Angelov (2011)](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~krasimir/phd-thesis.pdf)

It's not really all that strange--you can write regular grammars in automata, regular expressions or `A → Aa` style production rules (see e.g. [this StackOverflow answer](http://stackoverflow.com/a/13945932) if you're confused about this).

However, we don't usually say that GF as a programming language *is* PMCFG, instead that it is *equivalent to* PMCFG.

**PGF** is short for "Portable Grammar Format". It's the concrete low-level format to which GF grammars are compiled. The syntax I use in this post is specific to PGF, not to PMCFG in general. (Technically, PGF is an *extension* of PMCFG with added features such as multilinguality, but seriously, nobody is going to die if we just say that PGF is a format for writing PMCFG grammars.)

## Grammars

All my examples come from the
[Foods grammar](https://github.com/GrammaticalFramework/gf-contrib/tree/master/foods).
I'm assuming that if you're reading about advanced topics in GF,
you're familiar with Foods, but in case not, take a look at the
abstract syntax and why not check out the concrete in some language you
know.


## GF linearisation

Here we use a generic Romance language for concrete syntax: adjectives
inflect in number and gender, nouns have a fixed gender and inflect in
number; most adjectives come after the noun but some come before.
Here's GF code for the `Mod` function.


```haskell
lincat
  Kind    = { s : Number => Str ; g : Gender } ;
  Quality = { s : Number => Gender => Str ; isPre : Bool }

lin
  -- Mod : Quality -> Kind -> Kind ;
  Mod quality kind =
  { s = \\num =>
     let q = quality.s ! num ! kind.gender ;
         k = kind.s ! num ;
      in case quality.isPre of {
                True  => q++k ;
                False => k++q }
  } ;
```

So `Mod` constructs a table of `Number => Str`, choosing the right
gender form of `Quality` and putting it either before or after the
`Kind`, depending on the parameter `isPre` of `Quality`.


## Concrete categories

This is the actual output you get when you type `pg` (print_grammar)
in the GF shell! Let's start from the concrete categories for `Kind`
and `Quality`.


```haskell
categories
  Kind := range  [C5 .. C6]
          labels ["s Sg"
                  "s Pl"]
  Quality := range  [C7 .. C8]
             labels ["s Masc Sg"
                     "s Masc Pl"
                     "s Fem Sg"
                     "s Fem Pl"]

```

Okay, this tells us that both `Kind` and `Quality` have been split
into two concrete categores (`C5-C6` and `C7-C8` respectively).

The things in `labels` are *variable* to the category. This is easy to
see from the names of the labels---Sg, Pl, Masc, Fem are all names of
the parameters in the original tables.
What used to be `Kind` consists of two strings, labelled "s Sg" and "s Pl":
there used to be a table `Number => Str` in the field `s`, but now
it's just flattened into strings. So far not a big deal: we just went
from a record with tables `{ s : Number => Str }` into a vector of
strings `[sSg, sPl]`.
The same happened to `Quality`: it used to have a nested table `{ s :
Number => Gender => Str }`, but now all combinations are enumerated.


The things in `range` are *inherent* to the category: as we will soon
see, `C5` corresponds to masculine `Kind`, and `C6` to
feminine. Likewise, `C7` corresponds to postmodifier `Quality`
(i.e. `isPre` field is False) and `C8` to premodifier (`isPre` field
is True).

## Concrete productions
Now let's have a closer look at `C5`--`C6`. Which productions make them?

```haskell
productions

    C5 -> F24[]       -- Cheese
    C5 -> F25[]       -- Fish
    C5 -> F26[]       -- Wine
    C5 -> F27[C7,C5]  -- Mod
    C5 -> F28[C8,C5]  -- Mod
    C6 -> F29[C7,C6]  -- Mod
    C6 -> F30[C8,C6]  -- Mod
    C6 -> F31[]       -- Pizza
```

I added the comments (Cheese--Pizza) to make it clearer, otherwise it's
straight from `pg`. This is what we learn:

* Functions `F24`--`F28` produce a `C5` (masculine `Kind`).
* Functions  `F29`--`F31` produce a `C6` (feminine `Kind`).
* Functions `F24`,`F25`,`F26` and `F31` take no arguments.
* Functions `F27`,`F28`,`F29` and `F30` take 2 arguments, their types
  specified inside `[]`.

You don't know it anywhere from the PGF that `C5` is in fact
masculine, you just have to know if based on e.g. the fact that
Cheese, Fish and Wine are all masculine nouns in Generic Romance. If
you actually go and look at `F24` and follow the trail, you will
eventually get to the string `"cheese"`, and then you know that `F24`
corresponds to `Cheese`.

Anyway, we were interested in `Mod`! So we better look up
`F27`--`F30`. Let's check out `Pizza` as well, just to appreciate the
difference between functions with and without arguments.

## Concrete functions

```haskell
lin

  F27[C7,C5] := (S19,S20) [Mod]  -- post,masc
  F28[C8,C5] := (S21,S22) [Mod]  -- pre,masc
  F29[C7,C6] := (S23,S24) [Mod]  -- post,fem
  F30[C8,C6] := (S25,S26) [Mod]  -- pre,fem

  F31        := (S27,S28) [Pizza]
```

Okay, we have split `Mod` into several *concrete functions*
(called `F27-F30`) according to the concrete categories of their
arguments. There are 4 of them, because `{masc,fem} x {post,pre}`
makes 4 combinations.

`Pizza` doesn't change a lot: it's just called `F31` now, but it
didn't split into many.

Next, what are those `S19`--`S28`? They're called *sequences*. There
are 2 sequences for each concrete `Mod` (and `Pizza`), because the
goal category (`C5` or `C6`, i.e. masculine or feminine `Kind`) has
two strings in it: singular and plural.


## Sequences

Sequences define the actual action that happens to the
arguments. Compared to the [GF syntax](#gf-linearisation), the sequences look
quite primitive.

```haskell
sequences

  S19 := <1,0> <0,0>   -- post,masc,sg
  S20 := <1,1> <0,1>   -- post,masc,pl
  S21 := <0,0> <1,0>   -- pre,masc,sg
  S22 := <0,1> <1,1>   -- pre,masc,pl
  S23 := <1,0> <0,2>   -- post,fem,sg
  S24 := <1,1> <0,3>   -- post,fem,pl
  S25 := <0,2> <1,0>   -- pre,fem,sg
  S26 := <0,3> <1,1>   -- pre,fem,pl

  S27 := "pizza"
  S28 := "pizzas"
```

Pizza looks pretty self-explanatory? We renamed `Pizza` into `F31`,
defined it in terms of `S27` and `S28`, which finally resolve into
the strings "pizza" and "pizzas".

How about the others, with the weird numbers? These `<n,m>` are,
respectively, `<#argument, #string>`.

Just like `Mod` itself, the sequences used for all concrete versions
of `Mod` have two arguments. We don't even bother to name
them--they're just called `0` and `1`, short for "first argument" and
"second argument".

So what is the order of the arguments? You can look at the
[productions](#concrete-productions) with `F27[C7,C5]` and so on, or just the
original [GF code](#gf-linearisation), with `Mod : Quality -> Kind -> Kind`.  Both will
tell you that `0` corresponds to `Quality`, and `1` corresponds to
`Kind`.

The second number in the `<n,m>` is the index of the string in the
argument. As we remember from [concrete categories](#concrete-categories),
`Quality` has 4 strings, `Kind` has 2 strings. Now we can tell that
`S23 := <1,0> <0,2>` builds a new string out of the *first string* of
its second argument, and the *third string* of its first
argument. Here's an example pair of arguments:

```haskell
0 = ["vegano", "veganos", "vegana", "veganas"]
1 = ["pizza", "pizzas"]
```

Given these arguments to `S23`, we get the string *pizza vegana*.

Okay, that `S23` was only the first part of the concrete function
`F29`. Here's the definition again:

```haskell
F29[C7,C6] := (S23,S24)
```
Applied to the same arguments, `S24` produces *pizzas veganas*. This
makes sense: `F29` applied to `Vegan` and `Pizza` produces the vector
`["pizza vegana", "pizzas veganas"]`.

## Variants

Say that we want to be able to capture learner language: for instance,
I couldn't care less about the gender of nouns. I trust that people
understand me, even if I say *pizza vegano*. In GF concrete syntax, the
grammarian could model that as follows:

```haskell
lin Pizza = {s = table {Sg => "pizza" ;
                        Pl => "pizzas" } ;
             g = Masc|Fem } ;
```

Remember that masculine nouns are compiled into the concrete category
`C5` and feminine nouns into `C6`. The difference to our changed
grammar in the PGF is simple: just add one more *production* from `C5`
to `F31`.


```haskell
productions

    C5 -> F24[]       -- Cheese
    C5 -> F25[]       -- Fish
    C5 -> F26[]       -- Wine
    C5 -> F31[]       -- Pizza (m)
    ...
    C6 -> F31[]       -- Pizza (f)
```

How about adding another string as a variant? This time I'm not even
trying to make a plausible real-world scenario, but here's the
grammarian's solution to allowing "pizza" or "Neapolitan pie":


```haskell
lin Pizza = {s = table {Sg => "pizza"|"Neapolitan pie" ;
                        Pl => "pizzas"|"Neapolitan pies" } ;
             g = Masc|Fem } ;
```

This time we need a new concrete syntax function, let's just call it
`F32[]` and it will expand to two new sequences.

```haskell
productions

    C5 -> F24[]       -- Cheese
    C5 -> F25[]       -- Fish
    C5 -> F26[]       -- Wine
    C5 -> F31[]       -- Pizza (m), variant "pizza"
    C5 -> F32[]       -- Pizza (m), variant "Neapolitan pie"
    ...
    C6 -> F31[]       -- Pizza (f), variant "pizza"
    C6 -> F32[]       -- Pizza (f), variant "Neapolitan pie"
```

For completeness' sake, here are the two new sequences:

```haskell
lin

  F27[C7,C5] := (S19,S20) [Mod]  -- post,masc
  F28[C8,C5] := (S21,S22) [Mod]  -- pre,masc
  F29[C7,C6] := (S23,S24) [Mod]  -- post,fem
  F30[C8,C6] := (S25,S26) [Mod]  -- pre,fem

  F31        := (S27,S28) [Pizza] -- variant "pizza"
  F32        := (S29,S30) [Pizza] -- variant "Neapolitan pie"
```

```haskell
sequences

  S27 := "pizza"
  S28 := "pizzas"
  S29 := "Neapolitan" ++ "pie"
  S30 := "Neapolitan" ++ "pies"
```

For big grammars, this might blow up. To quote [Angelov (2011)](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~krasimir/phd-thesis.pdf):

>  The free variation is a useful tool but it have to be used
>  carefully. Note that when the variants are concatenated, the number
>  of possibilities multiply, so having too many variations could lead
>  to combinatorial explosion. It is even worse when the explosion is
>  not easy to find, for example the variants can be in operations
>  which are only later expanded in the linearization rules. At the
>  same time, if we refactor the abstract syntax and add explicit
>  categories for operation [--], then we can eliminate the variations
>  all together which usually improves the parsing efficiency.

## That's it for now

So, now you can type `pg` in the GF shell and try to decipher your
own grammar! Why not also take a look at the
[obscure](https://github.com/GrammaticalFramework/gftest#less-common-use-cases)
[options](https://github.com/GrammaticalFramework/gftest#detailed-information-about-the-grammar)
in `gftest`.
